[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
Our topic today is the
mind-brain relationship.
And my guest is
Dr. Karl Pribram,
a professor of
psychology at Stanford
University in the
Department of Psychology
and in the medical school.
Dr. Pribram is the author
of "Languages of the Brain"
and hundreds of articles about
the mind-brain relationship.
In fact, I would say, fairly,
that Dr. Pribram is probably
one of the most influential
scholars alive today in probing
the mysteries of the
mind-brain relationship.
Karl, welcome to
the "Mind's Eye".
>> Thank you.
>> It's a pleasure
to have you here.
You know, many academic
psychologists, and perhaps you
have some sympathy for
this point of view,
over the years have taken
a perspective, which laymen
tend to laugh at at
times, and they claim
that the mind doesn't exist.
I wonder if you can
explain that perspective.
Talk about what we mean, or
what you mean by the mind.
>> Well, I don't like the term
the mind because it reifies.
That means it makes a thing
of something that's a process.
We pay attention.
We see.
We hear.
Those are all mental processes--
>> Activities.
>> --mental activities.
But there isn't a
thing called the mind.
That might be something
you want to call yourself.
But the mind sort of makes
something concrete out
of something that's
very multifaceted.
>> And yet, somehow when I'm
aware of myself being aware,
I think that, well, that's
my mind that does that.
>> That does that.
That your mind does it.
I'd have to think
about that one.
Yeah.
>> You are very well-known in
psychology and neuropsychology
as the developer of the
holographic or holonomic model
of the brain.
Can you talk about
that a little bit?
And how it relates to the mind
or to the mind-body process?
>> OK.
>> I have to be on my
toes with you today.
>> Yes.
The holonomic brain theory
is based on some insights
that Dennis Gabor had.
He is the inventor
of the hologram.
And he gained a Nobel Prize
for his many contributions.
He was a mathematician.
And what he was trying
to do is develop a better
way of making
electron micrographs,
improve the resolution
of electron micrographs.
And so for electron
microscopy, he
suggested that instead of making
a photograph, essentially,
not with electron
microscopes, we
make photographs by using
electrons instead of photons.
And he thought maybe
instead of making
ordinary photographs,
what he would do
is get the
interference patterns.
Now, what is an
interference pattern?
When light strikes, or when
electrons strike any object,
they scatter.
But the scatter is a
funny kind of scatter.
It's a very
well-regulated scatter.
For instance, if you
de-focus the lens on a camera
so that you don't get the image
falling on the image plane,
and you have a blur, that blur
essentially is a hologram.
Because all you have to do is--
>> Refocus is.
>> --refocus it.
>> Contained in the blur
is the actual limit.
>> That's right.
But you don't see it as such.
And so one of the main
principles of holonomic brain
theory, which gets us into
quantum mechanics also,
is that there is a relationship
here between what we ordinarily
experience and some other
process or some other order,
which David Bohm calls the
implicate or enfolded order
in which things are all
distributed or spread.
And in fact, the
mathematical formulations
are often called
spread functions.
Let's spread this out.
>> Now, what you're talking
about here is the deep
structure of the universe--
>> Right.
>> --in a way, beneath the
subatomic level virtually--
>> That's right.
>> --of matter itself are
these quantum wave functions--
>> That's right.
>> --so to speak.
And they form
interference patterns.
Would I be wrong
in saying it would
be like dropping
two stones in a pond
with the way the
ripples overlap?
And is that like
an interference?
>> That's certainly the way
interference patterns remain,
yes.
>> And you're suggesting that at
that very deep level of reality
something is operating
in the brain itself?
>> Well, no.
>> OK.
>> In a way, that's possible,
but that's not where
the situation is at the moment.
>> OK.
>> All we know is that the
mathematical descriptions that
we make of, let's say, single
cell processes and the branches
from the single cells, and how
they interact with each other,
not only anatomically,
but actually functional
interactions.
That when we map those,
we get a description
that is very similar to the
description of quantum events.
>> When you take into account
that there are billions
of these single cells--
>> That's right.
>> --operating in the brain.
>> And the connections
between them.
So they're even more.
They're trillions of
connections between them.
And they operate on
the basic principles
that have been found to also
operate at quantum level.
Actually, it was the
other way around.
That the mathematics
that Gabor used,
he borrowed from
Heisenberg and Hilbert,
who developed them first in
mathematics, for Hilbert.
And then Heisenberg used
it in quantum mechanics.
And then Gabor used
in the psychophysics.
And we've used that in modeling
how brain networks work.
>> So in other
words, in the brain,
when we look at the electrical
impulses traveling through
the neurons and the patterns
as these billions of neurons
interact, you would say that
that is analogous, I suppose,
or isomorphic to the processes
that are going on at the deeper
quantum level?
>> Yes.
But we don't know that it's a
deeper quantum level, I mean,
in the brain.
>> Right.
And that may or may
not be the case.
>> Yeah, analogous isn't
quite the right word.
They obey the same rules.
It's not just an analogy
because the work that described
these came independently of--
see, an analogy would be that
you take the quantum ideas
and see how they fit to
the brain, the data we
have on the brain.
>> Yes, yes.
>> And that's not
the way it happened.
We've got the brain data first.
>> Yes.
>> And then we see, look, it
fits the same mathematics.
And the people who are gathering
these data, including myself,
weren't out to look for
an analogous process.
And I think it's a
very important point.
Because, otherwise,
you could be biased.
And there are lots
of different models
that fit how the brain works.
But this is more based
on how the brain was
found to work independent
of these conceptions.
>> Independent of any model?
>> Yeah, essentially,
independent of any model.
>> So you've got a
mathematical structure that--
>> That's right.
>> --parallels the mathematical
structures of quantum physics.
Now, what does that tell
us about the the brind?
>> The brind.
>> That might be a good
Australian way to say it,
the brind.
Anyway, what it tells me is
that the problems that have been
faced in quantum mechanics
for, essentially, the century,
well, since the '20s, late '20s.
>> Many paradoxes in
quantum mechanics.
>> And very many paradoxes.
And those paradoxes also apply
at the psychophysical level
and at the neuronal level.
And therefore, we have to face
the same sets of problems.
At the same time, I
think what David Bohm
is doing is showing that some
of the classical conceptions,
which were thought not to
apply at the quantum level,
really do apply at
the quantum level.
Now, I'm interpreting Bohm.
I mean, I'm not
sure he would want
to agree to what my
interpretation of what
he's doing.
But to me, that seems
to be what is going on.
So that the schism
between levels,
between the quantum level,
the sub-microscopic almost,
the subatomic level--
>> Yeah.
>> --and what goes on there--
>> --In the classical.
>> --and the classical,
the so-called uncertainty
principles, and all of that,
that all applies all the way
along.
But you've got to be very
careful in how and what--
how should I put it?
You've got to apply
it to the actual data
and not just sort
of run it over.
>> Now, to the average layman--
>> Yes.
>> --why would they
be interested in this?
Is there some significance,
say, to people
in their everyday lives,
or in their workaday world,
in the business of life?
>> Sure and this is the
critical thing that if, indeed,
we are right that these
quantum-like phenomena
or the rules of quantum
mechanics apply all the way
through to our
psychological processes,
what's going on in
the nervous system,
then we have an
explanation, perhaps.
Certainly, we have a parallel
to the kind of experiences
that people have called
spiritual experiences.
Because the description you get
of the spiritual experiences
seem to parallel
the descriptions
that quantum physics.
That's why Fritjof Capra
wrote "Tao of Physics",
why we have the woolly masters,
and all of this sort of thing
that's come along.
And in fact, Bohr and Heisenberg
already, and Schrodinger.
Schrodinger talked
about the [INAUDIBLE]
and Bohr used of the yin
and yang as his symbols.
>> Yes.
>> Because those, the
conceptions that grew out
of watching the quantum
level, and therefore,
now are the neurological
and psychophysical level--
now, there's a psychological
level as well--
seem to have a
great deal in common
with our spiritual experience.
Now, what do I mean by
spiritual experience?
You talked about
mental activity--
>> Yes.
>> --calling it the mind.
That aspect of mental
activity, which is very human,
may be true of other species
as well, but we don't know.
But in human endeavor,
we are always somehow,
many of us at
least, seem to need
to get in contact
with larger issues,
whether they're cosmology
or some kind of biological
larger issue or a social one.
>> Yes.
>> Or it's formalized in some
kind of religious activity.
But we want to belong.
And that is what I define
as the spiritual aspects
of man's nature.
>> Some sense of relationship
to the larger cosmos,
to the world about us.
>> That's right.
And that part has
this implicate order.
It has the explicate order too.
You know, ordinary
space-time order.
>> I want to stop for a second--
>> Sure.
>> --because you're using Bohm's
terms of the implicate order.
And we haven't really
quite defined that.
>> It's the holographic.
You've described it very well
with the pebbles and all that.
>> Yeah, OK.
>> It's a set of relationships.
>> It's the fuzzy picture.
>> Well, yes.
And you can talk about
it in terms of waves,
or you can talk
about it in terms
of mathematical matrices, which
have vectors in them and so on.
You can have continuous vectors.
Or you can have
continuous matrices.
You can have all kinds of
relationships between--
when you look at a
photographic plate that
has a hologram on
it, you can either
look at some of the
swirls in there,
or you can look at the
individual grains of silver.
>> Yes.
>> So there are all
kind of mathematics,
but they all fit
together, whether it be
Schrodinger's equation,
which is a wave equation,
or Heisenberg's more matrix.
These are not relevant
to the ordinary person.
But I just want to say it
here because otherwise we
get stuck in the wave,
as if it were all waves.
>> Yes.
>> And that's too simple.
>> But what you're saying,
if I can try and simplify it,
is that there's a level of
reality at which things are
what they appear to be.
I look at you, and I
see a body and a face.
And then there's another level.
That would be the explicate
level, where things
are what they appear to be.
Then there's an implicate
level, which is just is real.
But if you were
to look at it, it
doesn't look at all
[INTERPOSING VOICES]..
>> We experience it
entirely differently.
>> Yes.
>> As a spiritual
aspect of our being.
Or this implicate orders
is also a potential order.
We are not in it
most of the time.
But we had, for
years, this whole idea
of the human potential.
>> Yes.
>> And I think that's
what we're talking about.
>> Human potential may
be embodied somehow
in the implicate structure.
>> That's very nice, yeah.
Good way to say it.
>> And prior to the
development of quantum physics
and the holonomic
model of the brain,
people based their notion of who
they were and how their minds
worked more the Newtonian
classical models of physics.
And perhaps, in some sense,
if they bought into those
models would tend to deny
their spiritual experiences,
or not really feel connected
with that part of themselves.
Would you say so?
>> Very definitely.
And to recall something
that de Tocqueville said.
After writing his
histories, he said,
maybe I've been interpreting
it the wrong way.
He said, because
I've been doing it
in terms of classical
mechanics with cause and effect
relationships.
But when a human being
acts, this is not a cause.
This is a challenge.
>> Who wrote the books on the
[INTERPOSING VOICES] capitalism
and on democracy.
>> In America.
>> Oh, yes.
>> See, when we act,
it's a challenge.
And that's very
much a quantum type
holographic
implicate order idea.
Rather than having causality.
>> It's moving towards a goal.
>> No, it isn't.
>> Oh, all right.
>> It's a challenge.
It's different.
Moving toward a goal
would still be causal.
See, we don't even
have a good language
to talk about all this.
It's a challenge.
The whole system can reorganize
on the basis of this challenge.
And you never find out
where the cause is.
We were talking
earlier-- you know,
you said where does will start?
>> Yes.
>> Well, it's a challenge.
The whole system does it.
There isn't a start
and a next and so on.
Because time and
space are enfolded.
>> Yeah.
>> And therefore,
there is no causality.
>> It's all just emerging.
>> It's emerging.
And you can
challenge the system.
And it will respond in
an unpredictable way.
>> You know, I must say
I'm a little bit surprised
because you described yourself
earlier to me as a positivist
of sorts and a behaviorist.
And in a way, the
language that you're using
seems very much like the
language of the Buddhists,
who talk about--
>> Sure.
>> --no self and just process.
>> No thing.
>> One of the chapters I wrote
once was a "The Nonsense of No
Thing", in other words,
the nonsense of nothing.
But you know, it's non-sensory
because senses are lenses.
And as David Bohm
has said so well,
if you take the lenses
away, you've got a hologram.
Lenses tend to
reify, to objectify,
and particulate particles.
Take the lenses away, and
you've got this distributed.
>> So part of our mind-brain
process functions as a lens,
then?
>> Well, certainly
the senses do.
>> Yeah.
>> Right.
>> Uh-huh.
What about the other functions
of the mind, memory, learning?
>> Of what?
>> Caught me again.
It's such a habit.
>> What other mental functions?
>> Mental functions.
>> It's easy to say it
without reifying it.
Especially if you
want to be holistic--
>> Yeah.
>> --about this.
One of the things, in answer
to your previous question, just
a second, if I may interrupt--
>> OK, take your time.
>> --is that you said
I'm a positivist.
And you know, the hard-nosed
kind of scientist,
in my experience, of when
we were stimulus response--
>> Yes.
>> --scientists, that became
very soft after a while.
And the cognitive, which was
the hardest hard-nosed kind
of science--
which was soft, became
the hard-nosed one.
And I'm quite sure that the
kind of definitions I'm giving
are just as hard as
anything that ever
was in stimulus response cycle.
>> In other words,
at some point,
it will become to be seen that
if you talk about spiritual
experiences, if you refer
to Buddhists and mystical
concepts, that can be
taken in terms of--
>> Just as scientific.
>> --very hardcore.
>> Well, it's up to
scientists to do this.
It doesn't become automatic.
>> Very rigorous?
>> Yeah.
Well, you don't want to get
into rigor mortis in this.
But yes, I mean you
want to be able to--
see, the beauty of science
is that it's basically
based on sharing.
Now, the more carefully and
clearly I can define something,
and the reason we
want to quantify
is not because we're
interested in quantities,
but because then you can
communicate and share
much more clearly than if
you can't have quantities.
So all of science is based
on the notion of sharing.
And if we can define things,
if some Buddhist tells me,
you know, I've just
had an aha experience,
or I've just seen
the light, and I
don't know what the
hell he's talking about,
then I can't share that.
But if he gets me to
have the same experience,
that begins to be science.
And if I can make
definitions so I
can describe to you what
is going on, let's say,
that the pineal is secreting
some substance that
makes you suddenly flash
or something of that kind.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> Yeah, you know, then we
have some way of sharing this
experience, which goes deeper
than when we're sort of just
stunned by somebody saying,
yes, I've seen the light.
I mean, that may be
just metaphorical,
whereas it may
actually be that it
did produce a reaction
akin to stimulation
of the visual system,
so on, so forth.
>> Oh, you're raising
many issues here.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't want to get too
off [INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> OK, but my point is
simply that this business
of what's soft and what's
hard keeps changing.
>> Yeah, well, that's
a very important point.
>> Right.
And my prediction
is that the kind
of thing we're dealing with here
will be seen as solid and as
scientific in the 21st century.
I'll look back at some of the
fuzzy stuff that was going
on in the name of behaviorism.
>> Uh-huh.
Many scientists,
neuroscientists, today it's
almost axiomatic when they
talk about the mind, which
they sometimes do.
They say the mind is sort
of located in the brain.
I gather that that
way of putting it
is totally discordant with
your own view of things.
>> Yes, I think--
I mean, there are lots of
different ways of phrasing.
This one is that
the mental phenomena
are emergent properties
of how the brain works.
And so it's almost
like brain is secreting
vision and mind and all that.
But maybe a better
way of talking
about it would be to say
that mental phenomena arise
through the interaction
between brain
and body and the environment.
And that whole
interactive, this is
sort of what Karl Popper says,
that whole interactive thing
produces an emergent, which we
call mind and spirit and so on.
And I think that's a better
way than just thinking
of the brain secreting it.
>> Now, how does this model
relate to human potential?
If I want to cultivate my
various potentialities,
my skills, reach into
the implicate order
and make some of
it more explicate,
do you have notions
about that for learning,
for human development?
>> Well, you said it
yourself just now.
You reach into the
implicate order.
You allow yourself.
Freud called it regression
in service of the ego
to primary process
kinds of things,
which are more holonomic,
more holographic like.
Yeah, I think that's the general
way that I would say that.
This is different.
The other is imitation.
And the kind of thing
that we have role models.
And we take care of
ourselves in terms of model
ourselves on
someone and the kind
of thing you do in sports
when you watch a videotape
or something.
>> And would you say
creativity works the same way?
>> Well, creativity works the
same way in the following sense
that we allow ourselves to get,
let's just be very crude here,
into this waveform, where
one distributed system.
And this, then, allows
the fluctuations
that take place there
to create new forms,
which, in space-time, we
can't really do too well.
I mean, things are
already formed.
But if we get back into this
potential distributed implicate
type of order, then
these fluctuations
have a chance to
reorganize as a way,
or to organize new
foci of activity.
>> And these would take
the shape of mental images
in our mind?
>> By the time they get
to be mental images,
it's already pretty well
set into space-time form.
>> What is a mental
image in space-time?
How would you describe
that as a neuroscientist?
>> Well, I've got my image
of your face right now.
And I also have an
image of Brook sitting
in a chair over
there and a big eye
looking at me in front, a
television eye, with my eyes
closed.
I mean, that's mental imagery.
>> You wouldn't try and tie that
to resonant neural patterns?
>> Oh, sure, I'll
be happy to do that.
There are two
kinds of mechanism.
I mean, you can sort of divide
things up into twos and threes
and so on.
But if you divide
neural activity,
you can divide into propagated
nerve impulses on the one hand
and then these slow
potentials, hyperpolarizations,
de-polarizations that
don't go anywhere.
And they form this sort of
holographic like pattern.
And it's those that I feel,
and have some evidence
to support this, are what
we experience as images.
>> Would these sort of be like
standing waves in the minds?
>> Well--
>> Am I reaching too far here?
>> You said it in
the mind again.
>> Oh.
>> The waves aren't in the mind.
>> Standing waves in the brain.
>> In the brain.
They could be
thought of that way.
Or as, again, I use the
matrix analogy as well,
just so we don't get
too far into the waves.
But sure, some kind
of standing waveforms
that are there temporarily.
Sometimes it lasts longer.
And sometimes
they're very brief.
And we are not
even aware of them.
But the longer they last,
Sherrington had this idea.
And he said there seems to
be a reciprocal relationship
between reflex and mind.
The more reflex, the less
mental and vice versa.
>> Oh, OK.
That relates somehow to
free will also, I gather.
>> Well, there we get into a
different set of problems now.
Sure, to some extent, if you get
into your potential mode, then
new fluctuation, new
things can happen.
But usually, free
will is conceived
of in terms of how many
constraints are operating.
And we have in statistics a
notion of degrees of freedom.
>> Yes.
>> And I think our
will, essentially,
is constrained more or less.
We have so many
degrees of freedom.
And the more degrees of freedom
we have, the more we feel free.
And we have freedom of choice.
>> Well, what can we say
in wrapping the program up,
given all of these aspects
of the mind-brain system that
you've described?
How does that relate to, say,
the ultimate or the farther
reaches of human potential?
>> Well, I think in
the 21st century,
we're going to be able to do an
awful lot that we weren't able
to do up to now, simply because
science will be admitted
to the spiritual aspects
of mankind and vice versa,
that what has been segregated
for at least 300 years since
Galileo were the
spiritual aspects,
in Western culture at least,
have been sort of relegated
over here.
And people have split this.
You know, we build buildings.
We do surgery.
And do all of these things.
And then we if have a
spiritual aspect to ourselves,
we go do that somewhere else.
>> Separate.
>> Whereas now, I think these
things will come together.
And it'll be perfectly all
right for what we today
call in quotes faith
healers to come and help
with reduction of pain and
to ease all kinds of things.
So you know, it'll
be a different world.
I wouldn't even be surprised
if preventative therapies could
be instituted because they deal
with controls of ourselves.
So we aren't as
prone to get cancers.
>> That's very optimistic.
Well, Karl Pribram, it's been
a pleasure having you with me.
Thank you very much.
>> Well, you're welcome.
It's been a pleasure
being with you too.
>> And thank you very
much for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]